Introducing mesh layers (#3562)
qgis/QGIS-Documentation: source/docs/user_manual/working_with_mesh/mesh_properties.rst

.. only:: html

   |updatedisclaimer|

.. _label_meshproperties:

***********************
 Working with Mesh Data
***********************

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 2

Mesh properties
===============

> A mesh is an unstructured grid usually with temporal and other component.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A mesh is an unstructured grid usually with temporal and other components.
```

The spatial component contains a collection of vertices, edges and faces
in 2D or 3D space:

* **vertices** - XY(Z) points (in the layer's coordinate reference system)
* **edges** - connect pairs of vertices

> * **faces** - sets of edges forming a closed shape - typically triangles or

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **faces** - a face is a set of edges forming a closed shape - typically a triangle or
```

>   quadrilaterals (quads), rarely polygons with higher number of vertices

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  a quadrilateral (quad), rarely polygons with more vertices
```

.. _figure_mesh_grid_types:

.. figure:: img/mesh_grid_types.png
   :align: center

   Different mesh types

> QGIS can render mesh data using a triangle grid or a regular squad mesh.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
QGIS can render mesh data using triangles or quadrants.
```

Mesh provides information about the spatial structure.
In addition, the mesh can have datasets (groups) that assign a value to every vertex.
For example, having a triangular mesh with numbered vertices as shown in the image below:

.. _figure_triangual_grid_with_numered_vertices:

.. figure:: img/triangual_grid_with_numered_vertices.png
   :align: center

   Triangular grid with numbered vertices

> Each vertex can store different datasets -typically multiple quantities-,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each vertex can store different datasets (typically multiple quantities),
```

and those datasets can also have a temporal dimension. Thus, a single file may
contain multiple datasets.

> The following table gives an idea what information is stored in datasets.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following table gives an idea about the information that can be stored in mesh datasets.
```

Table columns represent indices of mesh vertices, each row represents one dataset.
Datasets can have different datatypes.

> In this case, it stored the wind velocity at 10m at particular moment of time (t1, t2, t3).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this case, it stores wind velocity at 10m at a particular moments in time (t1, t2, t3).
```

> In a similar way, the mesh dataset can store vector values at each vertex,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In a similar way, the mesh dataset can store vector values for each vertex,
```

> for example, vector of wind direction at given time stamps:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
for example, a wind direction vector at the given time stamps:
```

=============================== ========= ========= ========= =====
10 metre wind                   1         2         3         ...
=============================== ========= ========= ========= =====
10 metre speed at time=t1       17251     24918     32858     ...
10 metre speed at time=t2       19168     23001     36418     ...
10 metre speed at time=t3       21085     30668     17251     ...
...                             ...       ...       ...       ...
10m wind direction time=t1      [20,2]    [20,3]    [20,4.5]  ...
10m wind direction time=t2      [21,3]    [21,4]    [21,5.5]  ...
10m wind direction time=t3      [22,4]    [22,5]    [22,6.5]  ...
...                             ...       ...       ...       ...
=============================== ========= ========= ========= =====

.

We can visualize the data by assigning colors to values (similarly to how it is
done with :ref:`Singleband pseudocolor <label_colormaptab>` raster rendering)
and interpolating data between vertices according to the mesh topology.
It is common that some quantities are 2D vectors rather than being
simple scalar values (e.g. wind direction).

> For such quantities it is very desired to display arrows indicating direction.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For such quantities it is desirable to display arrows indicating direction.
```

.. _figure_mesh_visualisation:

.. figure:: img/mesh_visualisation.png
   :align: center

   Possible visualisation of mesh data

Supported formats
=================

QGIS accesses mesh data using the `MDAL drivers <https://github.com/lutraconsulting/MDAL>`_.
Hence, the natively supported formats are:

* ``NetCDF``: Generic format for scientific data
* ``GRIB``: Format commonly used in meteorology
* ``XMDF``: As an example, hydraulic outputs from TUFLOW modelling package
* ``DAT``: Outputs of various hydrodynamic modelling packages (e.g. BASEMENT, HYDRO_AS-2D, TUFLOW)
* ``3Di``: 3Di modelling package format based on Climate and Forecast Conventions (http://cfconventions.org/)

> * Some examples of mesh datasets can be found: https://apps.ecmwf.int/datasets/data/interim-full-daily/levtype=sfc/

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Some examples of mesh datasets can be found at: https://apps.ecmwf.int/datasets/data/interim-full-daily/levtype=sfc/
```

Loading a mesh layer
====================

To add a mesh layer to QGIS, open the :menuselection:`Data Source Manager`
dialog, either by selecting it from the :menuselection:`Layer -->` menu or
clicking the |dataSourceManager| :sup:`Open Data Source Manager` button.
Then, enable the |addMeshLayer| :guilabel:`Mesh` tab on the left panel
and press the :guilabel:`...` button to select the file and press

> :guilabel:`Add`. The layer will be added using the native mesh rendering.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:guilabel:`Add`.
```

.. _figure_mesh_datasource_manager:

.. figure:: img/mesh_datasource_manager.png
   :align: center

   Mesh tab in Data Source Manager

Information
-----------

.. _figure_mesh_info_properties:

.. figure:: img/mesh_info_properties.png
   :align: center

   Mesh Layer Properties

The :guilabel:`Information` tab is read-only and represents an interesting

> place to quickly grab summarized information and metadata on the current layer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
place to quickly grab summarized information and metadata for the current layer.
```

Provided information are (based on the provider of the layer) uri, vertex count,
face count and dataset groups count.

Source
------

The :guilabel:`Source` tab displays basic information about the selected mesh, including:

* the Layer name to display in the :guilabel:`Layers` panel
* setting the Coordinate Reference System: Displays the layer’s Coordinate

>   Reference System (CRS) as a PROJ.4 string. You can change the layer’s CRS,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Reference System (CRS) as a PROJ.4 string. You can change the layer’s CRS
```

>   selecting a recently used one in the drop-down list or clicking on |setProjection|

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  by selecting a recently used one in the drop-down list or clicking on |setProjection|
```

  :guilabel:`Select CRS` button (see :ref:`crs_selector`).

>   Use this process only if the CRS applied to the layer is a wrong one or

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Use this process only if the CRS applied to the layer is wrong or
```

Reviewer 2: Thanks!
